---
templateKey: blog-post
title: Chapter 3
date: 2021-10-29T12:10:03.588Z
description: Inventing the Property Owner Society
featuredpost: true
---
### In France, the "great divide" of 1789 and the invention of modern property ownership

On the 4th of August 1789, the French National Assembly vote to abolish the "privileges" of the clergy and nobility. The challenge, in the weeks, months and years that followed, was to define the exact list of these "privileges", and thereby to establish the separation between those rights which should be simply abolished, without any compensation, and those which were on the other hand considered to be legitimate and could be maintained, compensated or bought out, even if in some cases this required the right to be reformulated using the new political and legal language. 

The concept of power and property ownership held by the revolutionary legislators was in theory relatively clear: a distinction was to be drawn between regal powers (security, justice, legitimate use of force), over which the centralised State would henceforth have a monopoly; and the question of property ownership, which was to become, for all private individuals, an inalienable right protected by the State, this becoming its primary or even only mission. In practise, it turned out to be very challenging to determine who should be considered each right's legitimate owner, and then to decide which should be re-cast as new property rights, and which should be abolished.

To begin with, the National Assembly committee in charge of answering these difficult questions adopted a so-called "historical" approach. The idea was to wind the clock back to the origins of a given right in order to determine its legitimacy and in particular its binding (in which case it should be maintained) or non-binding (in which case it should be abolished) nature. Examples of rights which were abolished without compensation:
- the right of the nobility and clergy to be exempt from certain taxes.
- the right of jurisdiction afforded to lords; the removal of which initially resulted in chaos at the local judiciary level, but nevertheless the idea of the State having a monopoly on justice implanted itself definitively. 

Tithing was abolished too, and the Church's property was nationalised, also without compensation, which caused much debate, and many feared the collapse of religious, educational and medical structures. But those in favour insisted that public sovereignty could not be divided, and pronounced as intolerable the idea that the Church could continue benefiting from a permanent stream of income guaranteed by State protection, thereby constituting a quasi-state. For good measure, the Crown's property was also nationalised and the whole lot was put up for auction. The overriding philosophy was that the State should be financed by annual contributions, freely consented to by representatives of the citizenry and that perpetual property, its usage and improvement, should henceforth be a right exclusively afforded to private individuals. This break with the past is stark when we consider that monarchic budgets had always regarded revenue from royal lands as ordinary income, while tax revenue was simply a bonus, or extra, income.

### Corvées, banalités and rent

> A corvée is unpaid, forced labout, intermittently and for limited periods, for a landlord or other power. Often it was for one or two days per week. 

> A banalité is a restriction imposed on peasants by a lord, such as the obligatory use of the lord's mill, wine press, or oven, i.e. the landlord had a monopoly over certain services. These services were not free. 

In particular, corvées were seen as being too clearly tied to feudalism and serfdom, a system which was already at that time seen as having been finished with.

In practise, however, the committees and courts in charge of applying the Revolutionary directives decided that in many cases, a contractual origin for corvées could be found, since they in many ways resembled a form of rent. It was therefore decided that they should be maintained, or at least converted into rent, to be paid in cash or in kind (a corvée of one day per week could become rent equivalent to a fifth or a sixth of agricultural production); or be bought out, a solution which may have appeared as a good compromise. To simply annul the corvées, without buybacks or compensation of any kind frightened a sizeable percentage of the revolutionary legislators, who feared that this would call into question the rents themselves, as well as property ownership as a whole. 

The theoretical possibility of repurchases of corvées and other rights was, however, largely inaccessible for most poor peasants, especially given the fact that according to the Assembly and its committees' decrees, the buybacks were to be priced high. The value of land was fixed to the lump sum equivalent of twenty years of rent for purchases in cash and twenty five years for purchases in kind - these sums were in line with average property prices and rental returns at the time (between 4% and 5% per year), but were nevertheless unattainable for the large majority of the population. In the case of a particularly hefty corvée (multiple days of unpaid work per week), the repurchase could end up placing the peasant in a state of perpetual debt approaching serfdom or slavery. So the case was that the repurchase of rights and national property became possible for a small minority of commoners or nobility having the necessary liquidity at their disposal, and the peasant population was excluded. 

Banalités were less systematically upheld compared with corvées: some were still upheld, for example in cases where it was decided that the loss of a monopoly market would have a negative effect on the community. 

In general, the "historical" approach was faced with the major issue of of deciding how to establish the "contractual" origin of a given right. Going back far enough, several centuries into the past, it was clear to all that it was simply violence, notably in the form of conquest and serfdom, which has played a key role in the initial appropriations of landlords. If this logic was carried to its logical conclusion, the very idea of a "contractual" origin for these property rights was laughable. Instead, the objective of the revolutionary legislators (who for the most part were bourgeois landowners, or at least significantly wealthier than the majority of the population), was to find compromises which they deemed reasonable - that is to say, compromises allowing society to be rebuilt on solid foundations, while avoiding calling into question every single existing proprietorial relation, a dangerous manoeuvre which they feared could lead to generalised chaos (and the re-evaluation of their own property rights).

From July 1793, following fighting between republican and monarchic forces from which the republicans came out victorious, a decree was passed which adopted a "linguistic" approach to the analysis of property rights: all rights which contained terminology related to the feudal era were to be abolished immediately without any compensation. 

### Can property rights be reinvented without taking inequality into account?

Retrospectively, we can certainly imagine that other solutions could have been considered to avoid the pitfalls of the "historical" approach. In particular, was it really possible to try to redefine the conditions of fair property rights without taking into account the inequality of property distribution? In other words, to rebuild property rights on a basis which would have been acceptable to the greatest number would have meant treating large holdings differently to small ones. Although progressive taxation was discussed during the revolutionary period, only strictly proportional taxes were put into place.

The reorganisation of society suffered from multiple issues: the social role of the Church was removed without creating any equivalent service in the state apparatus; and any private property rights became further solidified, without widening access to property ownership. 

A French peasant was probably more free in the 19th and 20th centuries than he was in the 18th century, if only because he was not subject to the potentially arbitrary rule of a lord. It seems obvious to us in retrospect that a centralised state is better equipped to guarantee fundamental rights and freedoms. However, it should be stressed that confidence in the ability of a centralised state to provide regal, educational and medical public services, to guarantee security and to levy taxes over vast territories, all in a more just and efficient manner than what had gone before, was far from being an obvious path. 